Alright, so let's implement Heapsort.
What I'll do is add a sort method to the heap class.
So I'll do it after the delete method,
and so we'll say "public void sort" and the last index,
the last heap index so int last heap index
will equal size minus one when we start out.
Every time we swap the root with the last item
in the heap, our heap will be reduced by one.
So we're gonna say 4 int i = 0
i less than the last heap index, i++
and the first thing we're gonna do is swap the root
with the last item.
You can see there's a typo here,
so let me change that to index, and change that index here.
Alright, so we're gonna say int tmp= heap 0
because that's the largest value in the heap.
Then we'll say heap 0= heap last heap index -i
because that's the location of the last item
in the heap, remember we're gonna be reducing
the heap by one every single time we exchange the root.
And so when we start out, i is zero.
So, we'll be exchanging it with the item of position
last heap index when i becomes one,
we'll then be exchanging it with last heap index -1
because the original root will now be sitting
at last heap index, so it's no longer part of the heap.
Then, of course, we have to assign heap
last heap index -i with temp.
And so here we're exchanging the root with the last item
in the heap, and remember that the heap
is being reduced by one on each iteration.
Now, once we've done the swapping, we have to fix the heap.
And so the last thing we're gonna do is called fix heap
below, and because we swapped the root we always wanna start
at the root, and our heap consists of the indexes from
zero two, last heap index, minus i, minus one.
And so the very first time we call this
last heap index will be size minus one
and then we wanna subtract out i,
and then we need to subtract out the one
because we wanna exclude where we've put the root,
and so in the first iteration if we look back
at the main method, so we've got one, zero, one,
two, three, four, five, six, seven
and so the last index of our heap when we start out is seven
and so last heap index will be set to seven
because size would be eight.
It's always pointing to the next available index,
and so we're gonna swap the root with seven minus zero
on the first iteration which is seven.
So we're gonna swap the root with whatever's at heap seven
and then at that point our heap only goes to position six
because once we've swapped the root
we wanna exclude the root from the heap now.
And so when we're fixing the heap we wanna go from zero
to last heap index minus i which would be seven, minus one.
So we always wanna be subtracting out one,
because when we get to this point
we wanna be excluding the value that we just swapped,
and that's it, that is Heapsort.
The four loop is just the rinse and repeat part,
so once we've done that we're gonna come back around.
I will be one, we're still gonna be swapping the root,
and at this point as we saw in the slides,
the new root would be 75, and this time instead of swapping
it with position seven because i has been incremented
to one, we'll be subtracting out seven minus one,
which is six.
So we'll be swapping it with whatever's at position six.
And then when we come down here, we'll have 7-i
so 7-1=6-1=5 so now we will have reduced
on the second iteration the size of our heap by two.
And so we just keep doing that
until we've looked at every single item on the heap
and when we've done that the heap will be sorted.
So I'll come calc the peak and the delete stuff
and we'll print the heap before we sort it
and then we'll sort it, so we'll say heap.sort
and then we'll print the heap after the sort.
So let's go ahead and run
and here's our heap before the sort
and after the sort we have 40, 52, 55, 60, 67, 68, 75 and 80
Now I didn't print out the zeros because in our print heap
we're only printing the heap.
We're only going up to size, but of course,
because there's only eight elements in the array
there'd be two zeros following that,
but you'd know that when you sorted the heap.
You'd know that your heap only goes
to a certain point in the array.
So time complexity, the worst case for this
we go back to the code
for the sort
the worst case for this is 0 of n log n
and the reason for that is we swap in elements
right because we go through the loop n times,
and then on each iteration of the loop we also have to fix
the heap, and as we've seen before that can take log n time.
And so the worst case is going to be 0 of n times log n.
And so if you have a heap and you wanna sort it,
Heapsort can be decent sort out algorithm.
It's also an in place algorithm,
we don't use any extra memory that relies
on the number of items in the heap.
We're doing it in place, we're swapping
in the original array.
Now, keep in mind that once you've sorted the heap
it's no longer a heap, and so you wouldn't wanna sort
a heap that you wanna continue using as a heap.
And so if you wanna continue using a heap as a heap
you don't wanna sort it, because the moment you sort it
just like when we were doing the delete
and I said that if you have to find the value
you're gonna have to do a linear search.
You can't use a binary search because that would require
sorting the array, and once you sort the array
you no longer have a heap.
The whole structure of your heap has been blown away.
And so you would not wanna sort
a heap that you wanna continue using.
So if you want to use Heapsort,
your motivation for building a heap
would be cause you're gonna use Heapsort on the data,
not because you're gonna use the heap as a heap.
If you do it that way though, then the time complexity
will obviously not be 0 of n log n
because you're gonna have to build the heap first,
and that will involve heapifying at each step.
Even so, the worst case for doing that can be better
than some of the quadratic sort algorithms.
So it's something you might wanna consider,
but depending on the data of course,
there are all sort algorithms that we looked at.
Building a heap just to sort it might not be the best way
to go, and that sort of brings us full circle
to the beginning of the course where we say it depends.
It depends on what you're going to do.
Alright, so that's it for Heapsort.
I'll see you in the next video.